# *The Acolyte* (TV series)

***The Acolyte***, also known as ***Star Wars: The Acolyte***, is an
upcoming American television series created by for the streaming service
. It is part of the franchise, set at the end of the era before the
events of the , and follows a investigation into a series of crimes.

, , , , , , , , , and star in the series. Headland expressed interest in
working on the *Star Wars* franchise by the end of 2019, and was
developing a new series for by April 2020. The title was announced that
December. Filming took place in London and at Shinfield Studios in from
October 2022 to June 2023, with location filming in Wales and Portugal.

*The Acolyte* is scheduled to premiere on Disney+ on June 4, 2024, with
its first two episodes. The other six episodes will be released weekly.

## Premise

*The Acolyte* is set at the end of the franchise's era, approximately
100 years before (1999). It sees a respected Master investigating a
series of crimes that bring him into conflict with a former learner and
reveal sinister forces.

## Cast

- as Mae: A former learner who is now a dangerous warrior

- as Sol: A respected Master. Lee learned for the role.

- as Qimir: A former smuggler who now lives a life of leisure

- as Jecki Lon: Sol's young Padawan

- as Yord Fandar: A by-the-book Jedi Knight and temple guardian

- as Mother Aniseya: The leader of a coven of Force witches

- as Vernestra Rwoh: A senior member of the Jedi Order who rose to
  prominence as a young prodigy

- as Kelnacca: A Jedi who lives a solitary life

- as Indara:  
  A Jedi Master proficient in "Force-fu" fighting. Creator wanted the
  audience to immediately feel that Indara was "the most powerful Jedi
  in the room". She was inspired by Moss's portrayal of in when creating
  the character and intended for audiences to see Indara as "Trinity
  with a ".

Additionally, , Amy Tsang, and have been cast in undisclosed roles, and
will appear as Ensign Eurus.

### Development

At the premiere of the film (2019), television writer was asked about
her interest in the franchise and revealed that she was a big fan with
many ideas for *Star Wars* films that she wanted to make if she was
asked to by president . Headland contacted Lucasfilm to discuss her
ideas after completing work on her series (2019–2022), and a new *Star
Wars* series with a first-season outline and full . Kennedy agreed to
begin work on the series during that initial pitch meeting, and Headland
was revealed in April 2020 to be writing and a new female-centric *Star
Wars* series for the streaming service . Staffing for the series had
begun and it was expected to be set in a different part of the
franchise's timeline from other *Star Wars* projects.

Lucasfilm confirmed Headland's series was in development on May 4, 2020,
which is *Star Wars* Day. At 's Investor Day event on December 10,
Kennedy announced the title, *The Acolyte*, and said it was set at the
end of the era before the events of the . Lucasfilm executive Rayne
Roberts was developing the series with Headland, who was influenced by
the games and novels of the (EU). The first season consists of eight
episodes, with Headland directing the first two. Alex Garcia Lopez and
were hired to direct episodes by February 2023, and was revealed to have
directed episodes in March 2024. Executive producers include Headland,
Kennedy, Simon Emanuel, , and Jason Micallef, with Roberts, Damian
Anderson, Eileen Shim, and Rob Bredow producing.

In March 2024, Headland said she had pitched multiple seasons of the
series to Lucasfilm and had a plan for a second season if it was
ordered. She did note that she wanted to take a break after the first
season was released due to the long production timeline for the first
season, and so she could respond to any feedback from fans on the first
season when developing the second.

### Writing

A for the series was assembled by June 2021. Headland made sure the
group included writers with different relationships to *Star Wars*,
including some who were only fans of the , some who were specifically
fans of 's *Star Wars* projects, and one writer who had never seen *Star
Wars* before. The series' writers included Jason Micallef, Charmaine
DeGrate, Jasmyne Flournoy, Eileen Shim, Claire Kiechel, Kor Adana,
Cameron Squires, , and Jen Richards. When pitching the series to
Lucasfilm, Headland described it as " meets ". Responding to discussion
of the series being "female-centric", Headland said it would have a
female protagonist but would not exclude male characters or audiences.
She added that the series introduces new characters and ideas to the
franchise that she hoped would interest existing fans, but she
understood that not all fans would like it and felt that was fine
considering there were so many new *Star Wars* projects being produced.
In May 2022, Headland said writing for the series was mostly complete.

Headland wanted to explore the *Star Wars* franchise from the
perspective of the villains. She felt the High Republic era would be the
best point in the timeline to do this because the , who are the villains
in the films, are considerably outnumbered and in hiding during this
time. Lucasfilm also wanted to depict the time period on screen after
recently launching a publishing initiative set in the era, and because
they wanted to explore new parts of the *Star Wars* timeline away from
the films and other series. Headland noted that *The Acolyte* was the
earliest point in the *Star Wars* timeline to be seen in live-action at
that point. She wanted to address some fan criticisms of the *Star Wars*
films, such as how ascends to power without the knowing: "How did we get
to a point where a Sith lord can infiltrate the Senate and none of the
Jedi pick up on it? \[What\] went wrong?" She considered herself lucky
to be able to ask those questions in an actual *Star Wars* project. A
key theme in the franchise for Headland was "underdog versus
institutional threat", and in this part of the timeline it is the Jedi
who are the main institution. In contrast to the Jedi in the films, who
are monk-like figures in times of war, Headland said the High Republic
Jedi live in a time of peace and enlightenment akin to the , as seen in
their white and gold robes that look like they never get dirty. The
series questions the Jedi practice of training children, and also
explores differing views on and the amount of power and control that the
Jedi have. Headland took inspiration from the film (1950) to depict
events from multiple perspectives, showing how the series' protagonist,
former learner Mae, sees things differently to the Jedi Order.

*The Acolyte* is a with a serialized story that builds throughout the
first season, inspired by the approach of fellow *Star Wars* series .
Because there are no overarching conflicts or wars in the
series—Headland said it was "interesting to make a *Star Wars* with no
war in it"—the fight sequences are more intimate, focusing on duels that
further develop the characters. Noting that *Star Wars* creator was
originally influenced by and 's samurai films, Headland decided to take
more influence from films which she felt were "a little bit more
personal and less global and galactic". These included films by and such
as (1966) and (1971). Similar to the *Star Wars* series , *The Acolyte*
includes for fans of the original trilogy, , and the animated series ,
as well as references to the EU and . EU references include members of
the Theelin and Zygerrian species as well as some narrative elements.
The series introduces a coven of Force witches, separate from the
witches seen in previous *Star Wars* projects, inspired by mentions of
Force cults in the High Republic books and the EU.

### Casting

Casting was underway by the end of June 2021, when Lucasfilm were
looking to hire a young woman of color for the lead role. was in talks
for that part in December, and was confirmed to be cast in July 2022.
and *Russian Doll* co-star entered final negotiations to join the series
in September 2022, when and were cast. Lee was cast as the male lead,
after Headland was impressed with his performance in the television
series . At the start of November, was revealed to have a role in the
series. Soon after, Lucasfilm confirmed the casting of Stenberg, Lee,
Jacinto, Turner-Smith, Barnett, and Keen, and announced the casting of ,
, and Headland's wife . Headland had Stenberg, Barnett, and Keen in mind
when creating their characters; she wanted to see Keen with a after her
performance as the character in (2017). was cast in a guest role by the
start of December.

At in April 2023, was revealed to be part of the series' cast as Jedi
Kelnacca. Suotamo previously portrayed the Wookiee in the films and
(2018). Also at the convention, Lee, Keen, Barnett, Henderson, and Moss
were revealed to be playing Jedi, with Henderson cast as the character
Vernestra Rwoh who was introduced in the High Republic publishing
initiative. In March 2024, Headland said Rwoh was the only character
from the High Republic books that would appear in the first season, but
there were other High Republic characters that she hoped to include in a
potential second season. She felt Rwoh was important for showing the
state of the Jedi Order in the series, contrasting her role as a leader
in the order with the young prodigy she is depicted as in the books.
Also that month, character details for most of the series' main cast
were revealed, with Stenberg as former Padawan Mae, Lee as Jedi Master
Sol, Jacinto as former smuggler Qimir, Keen as Padawan Jecki Lon,
Barnett as Jedi Knight Yord Fandar, Turner-Smith as coven-leader Mother
Aniseya, and Moss as Jedi Master Indara. Headland said it was a
"no-brainer" to cast Moss as Indara, who was inspired by Moss's
portrayal of in . In April, was reported to have a small role in the
series.

### Design

Headland noted that the original trilogy has a lived-in quality while
the prequel trilogy is sleeker and more advanced. With *The Acolyte*,
she carried on this concept of "the further you go back, the more
exciting and new and sleek and interesting things look". It was
important for her to replicate the white and gold Jedi robes from the
High Republic books to symbolize the state of the Order, compared to the
brown robes later worn in the films.

### Filming

began by October 30, 2022, at Shinfield Studios in , under the
*Paradox*. Headland, Kogonada, Lopez, and Culpepper directed two
episodes each. and Chris Teague served as
cinematographers.<sup>\[\]</sup> The series was initially reported to be
using visual effects company 's technology to shoot in front of digital
backgrounds on a , as was done for *The Mandalorian* and its spin-off
series, but Headland later said the series was primarily filmed on
practical sets and did not use the technology, for creative and
logistical reasons.

Location filming had begun in Wales by January 2023, including at . From
mid to late March, filming took place on , Portugal, including at Fanal
Forest and the parishes of and . In early April, there were said to be
only a few weeks of production remaining. Filming officially on June 6.
Headland said filming went smoothly despite the length of production and
the amount of action sequences and . She said the cast did most of their
own action scenes, including actors who had worked in action before such
as Lee, Keen, and Moss. Stenberg, who was new to action, "threw herself
into training and did incredible work in a short amount of time".

### Post-production

Miikka Leskinen was one of the series' editors.<sup>\[\]</sup> Headland
said work could not be completed during the which delayed the end of
post-production, but the series was mostly done by March 2024.

## Music

was hired to compose the score for the series by February 2024.

## Marketing

Headland and members of the cast presented the first footage from the
series at *Star Wars* Celebration London in April 2023. The first
trailer was publicly released in March 2024, and teases that Jedi are
being killed. Charles Pulliam-Moore of speculated that Stenberg's
character could be the murderer and highlighted the darker aspects of
the trailer, including the suggestion that many characters could die in
the series. 's Ryan Dinsdale noted the elements in the trailer that are
associated with the High Republic, including the white robes and yellow
lightsabers of some Jedi characters, and compared some scenes to the
aesthetics of the original and prequel trilogies. Writing for , Ben
Travis discussed how the series had been kept a mystery for so long but
was finally starting to publicly reveal details with this trailer. He
opined that while *Andor* focuses on human drama, the trailer indicates
that *The Acolyte* will be going "all-out on colourful species,
lightsabers, and Force-users", and he praised the small amount of action
that the trailer shows. Lucasfilm announced that the trailer was watched
51.3 million times in its first 24 hours, setting a record for the
company's streaming series by surpassing the trailers for *The
Mandalorian*, , *Andor*, , and . An exclusive preview of the series will
be included at the end of 25th anniversary theatrical screenings of
(1999), starting on May 3 in time for *Star Wars* Day on May 4.

## Release

*The Acolyte* is scheduled to premiere on Disney+ on June 4, 2024, with
its first two episodes. The other six episodes will be released weekly.

## Lawsuit

In March 2023, Karyn McCarthy sued Lucasfilm over breach of contract,
stating that she was offered a producer role on both *The Acolyte* and
the series and chose *The Acolyte*. After several weeks of work in April
2022 based on an initial agreement with Lucasfilm, McCarthy alleged that
the studio chose to end her deal and not pay her for her work so far. By
that time, the *Sugar* role was unavailable.
